area a board charged with identifying
and making available all records related
to the assassination of President
Kennedy presented its final report
yesterday to President Clinton following
the meeting members of the assassination
records review board spoke with
reporters outside the White House their
comments are about 15 minutes we have
presented to President Clinton this
morning the final report of our work
which details our experiences in four
and a half years of hunting for
searching locating reviewing and
releasing to the public the records of
the tragic day in Dallas of November
22nd 1963 is a voluminous file and it is
there with remarkably few redactions and
available for the American public now to
review in its entirety it we have had an
extraordinary experience as the first
group of outsiders who have had the
authority to order declassification of
government records particularly
intelligence and law enforcement records
and the president gratefully received
our report we were very happy with the
support he gave us throughout this
entire effort and it is an effort
unprecedented in American history to
have Outsiders reviewing significant and
sensitive government records and
ordering release of virtually all of
these materials
I'm Anna Nelson I'm a member of the
board and I teach history and American
University it was a great interest to me
to be on the board because I'm someone
who because of my field of study has
used to breed information a great deal
and it was very interesting to to work
for once to get documents open I think
what we've done is really enrich the
historical understanding of the period
from 1961 264 when the Kennedy era
basically was in the
in the country's political center and
we've gone far beyond the assassination
itself in order to put it in some sort
of a historical context it's a very
valuable collection I want to emphasize
the fact that they have four civilians
five civilians really who were able to
declassified documents the agencies
could not stop us from looking into
classifying if they did not agree with
us they had to come to the White House
focus the mind they have to do that why
we really were a unique body and had
some very unique experiences and we hope
that we have convinced people in the
government that it's not dangerous to
allow records 30 35 years old to be in
the public view
I'm Kermit hall I'm dean of the college
of humanities at The Ohio State
University I really would like to send
two messages to you the first messages
that the president warmly embraced our
report spoke enthusiastically about the
need for openness in government
confirmed the wisdom of appointing the
board in the first place and underscored
the necessity of committing the United
States government to a long-term policy
of opening records to the American
people and the second is to remind all
of you that while the board is going
away today its work continues the echo
of our efforts will be heard literally
for the next decade or longer but it
also depends since some of these
documents have been postponed in their
release until the year 2017 in some
cases earlier it depends on all of us to
keep the people who are in the agencies
feet to the fire so that when those
dates come for documents to be open that
they don't shirk their legal and
constitutional responsibilities and
really the world responsibility that's
entailed in our act actions in making
sure that the American public has the
opportunity to come to terms with the
issue of whether or not its own
government participated in the murder of
the President of the United States back
in back in the early 1960s so I would
urge all of you as the as time goes by
here to remember that the legacy we
presented to you is the legacy of
openness and accountability in
government and it needs to be sustained
over time no matter how difficult
circumstances may become
my name is Bill Joyce I'm an associate
university librarian in the princeton
university library today is our last day
after four and a half years of effort to
form a research collection at the
National Archives that is still growing
and has now attained the size of over
four million pages this material not
only sheds light on the assassination
but on the entire period that is to say
the context of the Cold War is
illuminated in unprecedented detail as
is the inner working of the government
in a very tumultuous period in our
history this collection will be years in
the mining by researchers and it will
take a very long time to augment
understanding and to develop new more
informed interpretations of what the
imports of the period and the events
that occurred during it another part of
our work and the legacy one of the more
important of our legacies is the
precedent of what we have done is five
outside Pat board members charged for
the first time in American history to
release records of the federal
government that were previously
restricted we have developed procedures
and policies that might be applied to
other important issues other
controversies that have arisen in terms
of government behavior and we hope that
the policies and procedures that we have
developed might be applied and adapted
whenever necessary to help razoo resolve
these controversies and at the same time
to increase openness in government and
as Kermit hoja said to make government
officials as accountable as possible and
it's up to us to keep the pressure on
now that the board has gone out of
business to see to it that the
obligations that have been undertaken
and the promises to release records are
fulfilled thank you
many questions for us this morning yes
go ahead
we have to remember that this event
occurred during the height of the Cold
War and for that reason all records
virtually on this event were sealed all
the CIA's records were sealed the FBI
records were sealed many for for many
many decades into the future there was a
penchant for secrecy a desire to close
everything off in the name of national
security when the board reviewed these
records and applied its balanced
judgment we found little reason to
continue to protect these records in
fact many of them we found really should
not have been protected during the
1960's but we do have to remember the
era in which this occurred an era which
national security concerns were
heightened and caused the ceiling of all
of these important files they've done
the materials that you've seen have you
been able to draw any conclusions about
who killed President Kennedy well I have
to say first that our mandate was to to
find the records wherever they were so
to the extent this was an investigation
it was an investigation into where the
records of the Kennedy assassination
were and we found records in every nook
and cranny of the federal government and
many records in private hands we did not
find at least in my view records which
which conclusively proved either that
lee harvey oswald was the lone gunman or
that there was any particular conspiracy
involved the records do however document
the CIA's extensive search to see
whether there were links to Cuba or the
Soviet Union they also document the
FBI's extensive search to see whether
there were links to organized crime they
provide tantalizing hints in those
directions but in my view are nothing
conclusive to shake the foundations of
the original series
check let me if I could just get add
something to this if I may I think it's
worth worth remembering that we've had
over 500 books written on the subject of
the assassination of President Kennedy
all of that work was done without the
benefit of approximately 5 million
records of which have been released in
the space of the last two and a half
years I I think that all ought to make
is very sober about more extravagant
explanations of the assassination in any
case what will occur now is the
opportunity for people no matter what
their views are to come to the materials
in an honest and approachable way and
for critics to really exchange use the
other is worth noting in this regard is
that the board made a valiant effort to
secure records from Belarus and also
from the former Soviet Union now Moscow
we know jack and I and our former
executive director went to Belarus we
went to Minsk we met with the KGB we saw
the records they haves about a stack of
about 5 feet we weren't able to get
those records out our relationship with
the Belarusian government at the moment
is not the best and hasn't been the best
but more fundamentally those materials
we believe are really essential to
understanding Oswald and his his life
really two years in in Minsk was
intensively followed under surveillance
the most personal intimate details of
his life are contained in those records
and we would hope over time that the
Belarusian government and our state
Department of National Archives or
somebody can work out a deal to get
copies of those in the National Archives
we also know and we feel very strongly
there are additional materials that are
held in moscow and we would hope again
that through some efforts we would be
able to get those materials and into our
work as well we didn't have quite I
think the level of success we would have
liked to have had and working with an
apartment of state but I know that over
time that they'll give an even greater
effort to to helping us in that regard
one of the one of the problems that
arose with the investigations answer
some questions there is that each time a
group investigated Warren Commission the
House Select Committee on the there was
a Rockefeller Commission the church
study the Frank church is committing all
of these investigations then took their
records and hid them put them away close
the door on them so that in addition to
the general suspicion of the agencies
was a general suspicion of all the
investigations and these needed to be
released and that's something else I
fact our statute required that we look
at each and every one of them at least
them for the most part we have we
obviously protect the names of people
who might be in jeopardy in various
small things like that but I think that
was a very important part of the
suspicion the fact that nobody ever
investigated and then let anybody ever
see the records they used to investigate
are you saying the Warren Commission
didn't have and have all the information
no the Warren thorn Commission had only
18 months and they took what was given
to them they took the records of CI he
brought them and they took the records
the FBI brought them and they concluded
they were asked to conclude very quickly
they were asked to conclude so that the
country could settle down there was a
lot of we know now from records in
Lyndon Johnson library in other places
that there was a great concern that this
might there might be some element of
inclusion been part of the Communists
for example so the idea was to quickly
get it over with and they moved very
quickly in 18 months wasn't quite enough
time to go out and do their own kind of
Investigation
I think the next step I think we'd all
agree is for people to use that
collection it is very very well if
there's a database it's the first
collection the National Archives it has
such a wonderful database so it can be
searched it can be searched on the net
and if people will use the collection
and we'll start putting all the pieces
together conspirators generally don't
write it down but you can create a
mosaic you can create from these records
hopefully as Kermit Hall said a sense of
what really happened rather than
speculation of what might have happened
and and I think we all agree that we
hope that some of the records that we
have noted should be released in five
years some in 10 years should be
monitored to make sure that them out and
that people should look very closely to
keep that mentality of openness around
I think I just like to add that I think
it's important to record that the board
concluded its work we reviewed the
records that we were able to identify we
survey the agencies very carefully we
were able to review all of the records
of the various government investigations
so from that standpoint I think we can
say that our work has been concluded in
that respect however there are still
likelihood that there may be yet
additional records that may have been
misfiled they may have been misplaced
they may have been misunderstood there
are in addition to that records that
were redacted that for which the
redactions ought to come off sometime
between now and the year twenty
seventeen when all of the records are
released and we want to know that there
is an advocate now that we are going out
of business that there can be continuing
attention to make sure that that
information is released as it's
scheduled to be I think what just a
quick follow-up what will what will go
on now is the extensive work of going
through these files by individuals who
are qualified to review them carefully
and make conclusions from them I think
that our legacy hopefully will also be
that through this you new and unique
method of reviewing records and ordering
release that maybe we will taught some
of these government agencies that it is
better to be open than secret in many
cases and that perhaps some more trust
can be restored to a public that is is
weary of
lies that government may have made to
them in the past so that one of the keep
sightings of your committee was that it
needs to be more openness in government
and you said the president endorsed that
today do you see any irony the fact that
you're meeting with the president took
place in secret well no I don't see any
irony in that you know the president
graciously made some time available on
our schedule because he wanted to hear
about our report I know he's got a busy
schedule today and what we have tried to
do as much of our work and open as
possible we've conveyed to you really
everything that was said by the
President and its strong endorsement of
our reporter did the president indicate
that he might be helpful in trying to
pry some of these documents the point
with them from these agencies I I think
he certainly is interested in in helping
get the release of the foreign
government files that we've been trying
to find the issue was at for a while on
his agenda with President Yeltsin
earlier this month but conditions there
really made that the request impossible
at this time he does he is very
supportive of the opening of these
records his executive order demonstrates
that on declassifying records the more
than 25 years old and he indicated he
would continue the push for opening the
records of the federal government I just
wanted to say that the records of the
board itself constitute over 300 cubic
feet of material and there was a great
deal of information that up until now
the investigations of the assassination
have been secret those records were
classified they were put away our
records are out and available for the
public in addition to the collection and
people can evaluate our effort and see
just what we've done and make their
evaluations accordingly and I would hope
that all of you who the next time a
story comes about the assassination have
the good sense to realize there now more
than four million documents dealing with
it that relates to some of the most
secret activities of the government of
the United States as they figured in the
assassination and not let yourself be
pushed around by people who have very
complex and very exciting ideas about
the assassination that may not
necessarily have those rooted in the
most current and most valuable materials
that have been released with regard to
the assassination thank you very much
stopping copies yes
that was